>> Is there a deeper, more
hidden esoteric meaning behind
the Hollywood films that
we all have to watch?
I'm Jay Dyer.
>> And I'm Jay Weidner.
And this is Hollywood Decoded.
>> Chinatown is Roman Polanski
trying his hand at neo-noir,
and what he does is tell a very
seedy tale about corruption
and degeneracy at the highest
levels of the Los Angeles
elite.
So that's what we're
going to look at today.
>> I think that Chinatown
really was a great throwback
to the '30s, which is a very
interesting time in Hollywood,
in L.A., and the whole history
of the Water Wars and William
Mulholland and all of that.
What Chinatown is really
about, more than anything
else, is corruption.
>> Yeah.
>> And the name Chinatown
begins with a C, ends with an N,
and has the same exact number of
letters as the word corruption.
So it is the word they're
slipping in to the movie.
And every time they
use the word Chinatown,
they're talking
about corruption.
Like, I used to be
with him when we'd
patrol the streets of
Chinatown, implying
that Jack Nicholson
and the cop were once
corrupted cops on the street.
And there's literally no
doubt that Jack Nicholson
was probably a corrupted cop.
And so when the
ending-- the final
takes place in Chinatown where
Faye Dunaway is assassinated
by the police, that is the
ultimate in corruption.
>> Yeah.
>> And her father doesn't
even care about her at all,
just wants to know if
the daughter is OK.
And the other thing about
Chinatown, which I really like,
is the sparseness of the style.
Polanski is not getting
in front of the story
with his camera, which
a lot of filmmakers
will grab a really
good script and then
ruin it by having too many
cuts, and kind of crazy camera
angles, and all that.
Polanski keeps his
style very, very 1930s,
as if he was making a
film in the '30s, where
the cameras were 400 pounds.
It took 15 minutes to
take even a little move.
They could barely
pan the cameras.
There's very little activity
going on in the movie.
And I think that that really
helps the story unfold.
And the story itself
is an amazing story.
There's nothing, in fact, more
interesting in American history
than the corruption that
built Southern California.
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> The people coming
in from New York.
First, the orange grove growers,
the farmers, and then they
steal the water, and then that
creates a viable atmosphere
for Hollywood to exist.
And you watch this town
grow from 45,000 people
at the beginning
of the 20th century
to millions to the second
biggest city in America
by the time we get to the '70s.
And the whole story
of Los Angeles
is encapsulated in Chinatown
in that it is all corrupt.
The beginnings of L.A. itself
were just massive corruption.
And so the whole
idea that corruption
is what built Hollywood,
corruption is what built L.A.,
is really at the
crux of this movie.
>> Yeah, I love the setting--
this repackaging of the Dashiell
Hammett, James Ellroy-type
story, with the figure of
William Mulholland, who
represents the highest level
of corruption at the top.
So a lot of people have
this naive assumption
that, well, you can
just go to the police
and have your problems solved.
And the moral of
this whole story
is that the police are owned.
And we see so many
films even after
that that are inspired by
Chinatown that, I think, do
a good job of representing
this storyline like LA
Confidential or Black
Dahlia by Brian De Palma.
And it's a theme that
constantly pops up
but not one that we've
really touched on yet.
And there's also hints at
kind of the esoteric occult
aspects in the background
of these elite,
degenerate characters,
too, which we'll especially
see when we talk about Hodel
and Black Dahlia and things
like that.
But for me, I think what's
fascinating is the fact that
if you look at the time period
when you had a lot of public
works projects going-- like the
Hoover Dam and the idea behind
the L.A. waterworks being this
public thing that then becomes
privatized, it requires a lot of
skullduggery and almost a kind
of false flag that--
>> It does--
>> --that Mulholland organizes
in the storyline that leads
to the privatization where he's
going to control the water.
And we see this today with
these giant corporations
are going to say, wait, we own
all the water in this region.
>> Nestle.
>> Yeah, we own the water.
>> Yeah, and the
false flag of course,
that begins Chinatown is a fact
that Mulwray, who's Mulholland,
he's dumping water at
night to make it look like
there's a water shortage when
there is no water shortage.
>> The control of
resources, exactly.
>> That's right.
And so he's creating a
false water shortage,
killing the farmers,
which is avidly
displayed in the courtroom
scene, and then draining--
literally draining the
rest of all of this water
down into L.A., sucking
the entire West dry.
And we know this is true because
the Owens Valley is losing
all of its water,
there are lakes
drying up all over California--
all hooked into this
gigantic aqueduct,
which is feeding Los Angeles,
which gets very little rain--
like eight or nine
inches a year of rain.
And so you see this
kind of giant sucking--
like almost Arconic
thing happening.
We're going to take all
the resources of the West
and turn it into
Hollywood movies.
>> Yeah, right, exactly.
>> It's so crazy.
>> And he has that name
that then becomes so iconic
for famous roads like
Mulholland Drive.
And you know, we
think of all the dark,
mysterious,
nefarious things that
have happened on
Mulholland drive
related to the Manson case,
and with Wonderland Avenue,
and Laurel Canyon, and all that.
What we're going to
look at first, I think,
is this scene that details this
elite privatization combined
with just total
psychopathy and degeneracy.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- I said I want the truth!
- She's my sister
and my daughter!
[CRYING] Khan, please, go back.
For God's sake, keep
her upstairs, go back.
My father and I understand.
[END OF VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>> So at the climax of the film,
the Jack Nicholson's character
is trying to figure out what
Faye Dunaway is hiding from
him.
And all through the film,
she's been very elusive,
and hiding her identity, and
acting like she's other people,
and--
>> Why she won't come out and
say exactly what's going on.
He can't figure it out--
>> He can't figure out.
>> --like why she's
covering for her dad.
>> I said I want the truth!
>> And then finally,
he loses it.
She's pressed into to the wall.
He's got his nose almost
cut off, trying to go--
>> [INAUDIBLE] after him.
>> He's got everybody after him.
And so he kind of
loses it because he's
tired of her lying, and he can't
understand why she's lying.
So he hits her to try to
get the truth out of her.
And he finds out that
she is protecting
a young girl who is her
daughter, but also her sister.
And then we get the
revelation that Mulwray
is having sex with his
daughter, and that he is not
just one of the most
corrupt people that's ever
been involved in the world
of politics in Los Angeles,
he's also corrupt to the
core in his own life,
in his own values.
And I think it's really
important to talk about that
because I really believe this.
I really believe
that when you rise up
into the higher
realms of the elite,
you begin discovering
that they're
involved in some things that
are really disconcerting.
>> And what's really strange is
that this is a constant theme
in noir film and in
neo-noir is the--
there's almost always a
grotesque or some extreme level
of perversion that's going
on amongst the high--
when you think about the
Humphrey Bogart films,
there's a constant theme with
the dames and the broads,
you know-- all
these femme fatales
that have the dark secret
and their connection
to some high-level criminality
that oftentimes does evolve.
Even in older '40s and '50s
versions of these stories--
pornography and
drug trafficking,
which they couldn't
actually show,
but they would hint at
in a lot of those films,
like Glass Key and Laura
or these famous noir films.
And so we have a
representation of that here.
And again, it just echoes
the constant refrain that's
in the mainstream media now--
public stories about high-level
degeneracy and perversion
that involve these kinds of
trafficking, and sexual incest,
and things like this.
>> My favorite uncle was
a high-ranking FBI agent,
and he served with J. Edgar
Hoover and all of that.
And right before he
died, I asked him
what his favorite
movie was, because he
knew a lot about the world,
and he said Chinatown.
He said Chinatown was a
movie that if you watch it
over and over, you'll
really begin to understand
what this reality is all about.
And of course, at the
time, I wasn't quite sure
what he was talking about.
I was young.
But now, I actually
see it, and I
can see it with the
recent revelations
about high-ranking
people in the government
and what they're up to.
And I see that it's
always been here.
It's never gone away.
And I think that that's what
Robert Towne, the screenwriter,
is trying to say--
that this is an ever-present
evil that is here now
in Hollywood, i.e. in the
'70s, when the film was built,
and it was here 30
years ago, and it
will be here 30 years from now.
So I think that's the
kind of the warning out
of the gate by Robert Towne.
I also find it interesting that
this is one of the only scripts
that Polanski did
that he didn't write.
So he invested a
lot into a script
that he had nothing to do with.
And again, I think it was
just such a good script
that he knew he couldn't
mess with it in any way.
He probably wanted
to, but Towne had
created such a closed-off
system in the script,
that you couldn't find any more
stories except the corruption.
Yeah, noir has the femme
fatale in every movie,
and frankly, there's
a lot of violence
against women in
film noir, basically,
because the woman is hiding
something from the protagonist.
And she's not really
the antagonist,
but she seems to
always, in these films,
be working somehow
for the antagonist.
>> Right, when you think about
Maltese Falcon or Casablanca--
in both of those films,
there's a secret, and--
you know, is Bogie going to
get with the girl or not.
And most of the time,
he's just like, forget it.
>> And if we go into Roman
Polanski and his career,
we can see a very tragic story
of him as a young boy having
to traipse across Poland
to escape the communists,
and then the Nazis.
And then he makes
some student films
that are kind of interesting.
And then he finally
goes to Hollywood,
and I believe this is his first
Hollywood-- second Hollywood
film.
He did Rosemary's
Baby and then this.
And we can see
that he's bringing
this darkness of his early
life back into these movies.
He's a very dark character.
There's no doubt about it.
>> He's consistently interested
in trauma and in overcoming
trauma in some way.
And so I think what we want
to look at in the next clip
is how the Faye Dunaway
character is still
under the thumb of
her corrupt father.
And even in that
final scene where
you think she's
going to get away,
and she's going to break
free from this guy's control,
she's not able to because
he owns the police.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Evelyn, you're
a disturbed woman.
You cannot hope to provide.
- Evelyn, put that gun away!
Let the police handle this!
- He owns the police!
Get away from her.
- You'll have to kill me first.
- Get away!
[END OF VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>> So here, we have in
the climax of the film,
her trying to get away from
her controlling father,
and she's not able
to break free.
She's traumatized.
And that's, I think, an
overlooked aspect of this film
is the fact that she's
been abused her whole life.
She's even abused by Jake
in her love relationships
that she develops with him.
So she doesn't feel
that she can bond
with any of the male
characters at all,
and that's because of the trauma
that her dad has inflicted
on her.
And I think that's
the real tragedy
is that this is what
happens in the real world.
If archetypal figures,
and parental figures
in our lives, or people
that we look up to abuse,
that really messes up
people for their whole life.
And a lot of psychologists
have talked about this,
religions have
talked about this--
I mean, this is
kind of fundamental,
but that's what this
film is saying--
is that people are being used.
L.A. uses its citizens
through the parasitic sucking
that you're talking about.
Hollywood is a kind
of parasitic entity.
And the male characters in
this film are very dark.
They're very abusive.
And I think that is a
positive aspect to the film
that Polanski is trying to
say, is that this abuse only
furthers the
problem, and it only
allows these oligarchs and
elites to ruin the future.
>> Yeah, also, you know, I
don't think we quite understand
in our current environment how
really violent the world was
in the 1930s.
>> That's a good point.
>> Very violent, male-dominated,
women had no rights--
and we can clearly
see that they were
being used by the elites
for really terrible reasons.
And I think Polanski
should be applauded
for showing all of this.
I think that showing
a ritual trauma
and what it does
to generations--
and the very frightful
shot near the end
of the film after
Faye Dunaway dies,
where John Houston takes
her daughter in the way
that he grabs her is very
suggestive-- that he's
about to do the same
thing to her that he
did to his daughter.
And I think that that is what
Polanski is trying to say.
So in some ways, Polanski
suffered his own abuse
as a kid trying to
escape Nazi Poland,
and I think that he's showing us
in all of his movies in a way,
that this trauma
plays a very bad thing
on the human condition.
And I think this is a--
>> It perpetuates.
>> It does.
It's a common theme that he
has throughout his movies.
>> Well, I think the next thing
that we want to look at is
the conversation between Jake
and Mulwray where they discuss
owning the future.
And what's funny is that
we're kind of like Jake
as the viewer.
We're brought along
this storyline,
and we think naively.
We tend to think that
the existing power
structure and
system is therefore
for our good-- for our benefit.
Maybe we've even been a
little corrupt like Jake,
but we don't realize how
high the corruption can go.
It's kind of like Bill
Harford in Eyes Wide Shut.
He doesn't realize the levers
of the control above him.
And so when he steps into
that billionaire level game,
he realizes it's a
different playing field.
And so that's what happens in
this scene, where he learns
that, oh, the goal
here is not just
making a million
dollars here and there,
but actually
controlling the future
through the control
of resources.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- How much are you worth?
- I have no idea.
- How much do you want?
- I just want to know
what you're worth.
Over $10 million?
- Oh my, yes!
- Why are you doing it?
How much better can you eat?
What can you buy that
you can't already afford?
- The future, Mr. Gittes.
The future!
Now where's the girl?
I want the only
daughter I've got left.
As you found out, Evelyn was
lost to me a long time ago.
- Who do you blame for that?
Her?
- I don't blame myself.
See, Mr. Gittes,
most people never
have to face the fact
that at the right time
and the right place,
they're capable of anything!
[END OF VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>> So that would seem to
me to be like the goal
of the Illuminati--
is to control the future
after you're dead.
If you look at like the
history of the Rothschilds,
you can see that
they're continuously
trying to create a
future that's going to be
there long after they're dead.
David Rockefeller just died--
again, the same thing.
You know, why is
this guy spending
his last years of his life--
he has all the
money in the world--
trying to create machinations
that are not even going to be--
he's not going to get
anything back from them
ever, because they're going
to go off into the future,
extrapolating into the
future, and he's not going
to get any benefit from it.
So why is he doing it?
>> It really is an
irrational kind of game.
>> It is.
>> And it doesn't make
sense to basically--
Jesus even says
this-- what does it
profit a man to gain the
whole world and lose his soul?
Right?
So if you build this giant
empire and you own everything,
what do you get from
that when you die?
When you hit the grave, right?
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> Exactly.
And so what I want to
kind of address now
that we've kind of
talked about Chinatown
is the other general
corruption that's
in Los Angeles for which Roman
Polanski is somewhat connected
to.
>> And John Houston
and Jack Nicholson--
they all know about this.
>> So Roman had his illicit
sex with the 13-year-old girl
at Jack Nicholson's house.
Jack Nicholson and Marlon Brando
shared a backyard together.
And Marlon had his
own predilections.
And they were good buddies.
And when Marlon Brando
died, Jack Nicholson
bought his house.
>> You also have--
I think Christian Brando died.
>> Yes, he did.
>> Mysteriously.
>> Very mysteriously.
>> So a lot of weird deaths.
>> And furthermore, Jack
Nicholson thought that his
mother was his sister
when he was growing up.
She had an affair
early on, like when
she was very young, with
someone who is, we think,
an elitist of some kind.
And Jack was born.
And so her mother
became his mother,
and she became Jack's sister.
And it wasn't until he
was in his early 30s
that he found out that,
actually, his sister was
his mother.
And I think Towne knew this and
put it into the screenplay--
>> Oh wow to kind of show you--
>> So he could identify with
this Faye Dunaway character.
>> Yeah, so there's a lot of
weirdness going on with these
actors and with these directors.
And Polanski, of course,
has his own problems
in that just a few
years before Chinatown
and right after Rosemary's Baby,
his wife was killed by the--
>> Sharon Tate.
>> --yeah, Sharon Tate was
killed by the Manson family,
supposedly.
And again, there's
ties to ritualism--
>> Absolutely.
>> --Satanism being practiced
up in the Hollywood Hills,
the fact that he made a movie
about Satanism just previous
to this is a very odd
coincidence, I think.
>> Yeah, what's fascinating
is that this is neo-noir,
and the whole genre of noir,
as we said before in other
episodes, is very
influenced by surrealism.
And one of the most
prominent surrealists
was Man Ray-- that
very bizarre artist
who self-described
as a Luciferian.
And Man Ray was
believed to be connected
to the circles of
the Black Dahlia.
I mean, he was friends with John
Houston, friends with Hodel,
they all hung out, and partied,
and had orgies together,
according to the public record.
So yeah, I think
that we're looking
at a very dark background
that is maybe--
maybe Polanski's
films are his way
of trying to deal with
this-- kind of trying
to process all of this
darkness that he's been around.
>> I agree with that.
And in a way, a lot of it
is revelation of the method.
You know, that
they're are actually
showing us what goes down in
Hollywood in the background.
>> They are.
And again, I go back
to things that we've
touched on before
with the David McGowan
series on Laurel Canyon--
how this continued
into the '70s,
and how Polanski, during
the making of Chinatown,
must have been aware of
this secret studio that
was atop of Laurel Canyon and
all of the strange business
that was going on in
Laurel Canyon at the time.
And he lived in Laurel
Canyon with Sharon Tate,
and that's where the
murders took place
was at Roman Polanski's house.
And there's just so many
strange things going on
at that time period
that you really
have to zoom back
to get a bigger
picture of what's happening.
>> Yeah, one thing I think
that's interesting about
Polanski, as you said, is that
he's in these circles of all
these people who are involved
in a lot of this dark stuff.
So this is kind of his world--
for better or for ill.
>> That's right.
>> I mean, so the
artwork that he makes--
I think he's just putting
out there what he knows
and what he's seen.
And a lot of it is,
I think, bad stuff.
It's dark.
He tries to dress it up
and make it attractive,
especially when we look at
something like Ninth Gate.
But at times, he'll make
films that are very positive,
like Oliver Twist, which I
thought he did a good job at.
>> He did do a good job.
Great film.
>> So it's not always
bad with Polanski,
but what you have here is him
showing that the elite are
involved in the very
things that are illegal.
So the people that
run the police--
the police are the ones who
are supposed to be controlling
the vices, right?
The vice department.
They're owned by the
guys who own the vices.
And so I think that
he just sees it
as kind of a giant
contradiction, a giant game,
a giant absurdism.
Because he's partying
with all the people
who are buddies with the mayor,
and the governor of L.A.,
and that's who he
parties with, and he
sees what they're really doing.
So from his vantage
point, I think he sees it
as just giant contradictions.
>> Yeah, and again, like
you brought up Oliver Twist,
we are talking about--
he's still kind of
enthralled by the corruption,
even in a positive
movie like that.
He still wants to show you
the nugget of corruption
that destroys the boys' lives--
the pickpockets--
and I think he's
doing the same thing in
Chinatown, where he's trying
to show you the corruption.
But I think he is working
it out in some ways.
I think he feels maybe
a little bit ashamed
that he got accepted into
these big places and, you know,
the manipulation
that they're doing,
and I think he's
trying to work it out.
At the same time, he's
enthralled by it, I think.
>> Well, he probably was
the one who took the rap.
I mean, I don't imagine he
was the only person doing
illegal things in these circles.
>> I think you're right.
>> But he's the one
that ends up, you know,
banished to France, essentially.
I'm not saying that
he's good; I'm just
saying that that's
what happened,
historically-- he was
convicted of these things.
So I think that he's running
in these circles of people
who were--
he's making films
about corrupt people,
and if you're running
in those circles,
you have to expect that
you might get screwed over
by these corrupt people if
you're involved in their stuff.
>> And they were the
elite of Hollywood,
and they could get
anything they wanted,
and they acted that way.
>> So I think that even though
this is really dark imagery
and it's difficult, these are
culturally important films.
They're ranked by most
critics, by most academics,
by most film institutes, and
academies, as, you know--
this is usually even maybe in
the top 10 of American films.
So I think it's important
for that reason,
and we have to look at it--
we have to consider and
be aware of it, just
as a cultural
artifact, you know.
And in the same way that much
of Gothic literature that we
talked about was
very important--
Faulkner, Flannery
O'Connor, I mean,
these contain dark themes--
even, at times, Mark Twain.
But they're still important
for their significance--
for their symbolic
value and meaning.
And so even though we obviously
condemn the treatment of women,
I think Polanski's
showing us that that
was a period that was
brutal, and women were not
treated well then.
And so the extension
of rights to women
is something that's much
more positive in our day.
They have a lot more freedom
and rights than they had then,
and that's actually
a positive thing.
>> I agree.
And you know, I think
that Chinatown is slowly
climbing its way into the very
top echelon of best movies
ever made.
I think that's another reason
we had to include it in this.
I mean, it is
really a good movie.
There's no doubt about it.
I believe it's up there with
Vertigo, and Citizen Kane,
and 2001 as one of the
best films ever made.
And Polanski deserves
a lot of credit
for having the guts to
make a film like this.
So yes, it's hard to watch.
Yes, it's brutal in its honesty
about the way the world was
in the 1930s, especially
towards women,
and I think kudos to Polanski
for actually showing that.
>> Yeah, and I think we can
say that objectively about
a creation of art without making
a moral statement or a moral
promotion of the
person themselves.
I mean, we can condemn his
beliefs, and lifestyle,
and the actions that
he's committed--
>> And still like his film.
>> --and still appreciate
his artistic creation.
>> That's right.
I really think that
it's the art not
the artist that's important.
>> So I think that even
the darkest aspects
of our experience, they actually
serve a purpose in the grander
scheme or in Providence--
divine Providence or whatever--
to actually show us the reality
of the good and that the good
is actually stronger and
actually overcomes evil.
I firmly believe that.
And I think that even somebody
who is not a very respectable
character-- they're not totally
evil, so they're still--
even in their
artwork, they're going
to have some aspect of
the good that comes out.
And I think that if
we look at Ninth Gate,
the film ends with
that same idea.
It's another Polanski
film that shows that even
in the midst of this
darkness, it actually
is something that leads
us back to the light
because darkness is
negation; it's privation,
as the ancient
philosophers used to say.
It's non-being.
It's nothingness.
And we crave existence.
We crave life.
We crave the fullness of being,
as Aristotle used to say.
So I think that if we
think about it that way,
it actually puts us back on
the road towards the good.
>> Yeah, I think that
uncovering darkness can lead you
to the light.
>> It tells us what to avoid.
>> What to avoid--
I often use the analogy of--
my generation went to Vietnam,
and when we came back,
we actually saw what
violence was really like.
And we began making movies
that depicted violence
as it really was, not a little
bullet hole going into someone,
a little blood coming
out, or anything
like that, it was real.
And we were criticized by
our parents' generation
as encouraging violence and
making it like it was OK.
But actually, people
watched those violent movies
and didn't want to
go to war anymore.
>> Exactly.
>> They didn't want to
be involved in violence,
which was really cool before the
violent movies and very uncool
at the other end of
the violent movies.
And I think Polanski
is revealing to us
the corruption that we really
didn't know about, even
in 1974.
And in that, we can see that we
have to make this world better.
We have to make sure
the elites aren't
doing this to their
children, and to us,
and make a better world.
And I think we actually have.
I think the world is
a better place now
than it was in the 1930s.
>> I think that if most people
have the false impression that
if they can attain
wealth, they can status,
they're going to have it made.
And so they're trying
to shoot for getting out
of the middle class maybe
and into that upper echelon,
but what Polanski is showing
you is that just attaining
some status of wealth--
the people in that
class, so to speak,
are most often very miserable,
and they're very corrupt.
So just attaining
some class is not
going to give you the
satisfaction that you're
seeking for.
>> And I think Polanski probably
found that out himself--
Exactly. --coming from
a poor background,
making it, and then realizing
that all he was surrounded with
were corrupt people.
>> Exactly.
>> And he was corrupt, too.
>> Join us again next time
for Hollywood Decoded.
I'm Jay Dyer.
>> And I'm Jay Weidner.
Thanks for watching.
[INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC THROUGH
CREDITS]